%!TEX encoding=UTF-8 Unicode
\section{Intro}
\label{sec:intro}

Using memory is both trivial and extremely complex: any developer is able to
access it, but to use it efficiently one needs to take into account several
performance factors such as cache hierarchy, \emph{NUMA} architecture
\cite{Drepper07What} \ldots

To ease the developer's work, many efforts were made to provide automated
tools such as \emph{numactl, kmaf, numa balancing \ldots}\DB{more, refs}
managing memory and thread mapping on the \emph{NUMA} hierarchy. However these
tools have an overhead as they need to learn the application behaviour.
Further more they are not able to change the memory access pattern, therefore
the might not provide any improvements for bad memory use.
\itodo{figure from combinedAff}

There are several tools such as VTune \cite{Reinders05VTune},
HPCToolkit\cite{Adhianto10HPCTOOLKIT} \DB{more refs? } designed to help the
developer understanding and improving its applications performances,
nevertheless most of them relies on CPU counters and provides only few
informations on the memory behaviour. Tracing and the memory behaviour is
complex as (almost) every instruction triggers (at least) one memory access.
Although several studies have addressed this problem using sampling
\cite{Lachaize12MemProf} or limiting the amount of informations stored
\ref{??}, none of them provide a user friendly visualization or automatic hints
to help the developer improving it's application.


In this paper, we present \TABARNAC, a new tool to trace and visualize the
NUMA behaviour of an application. \TABARNAC~ summarize the trace in easy to
understand plots and provides some specific hints to improve the NUMA
behaviour. In section \ref{sec:soa} we discuss related work, then we present
some motivations in section \ref{sec:motivations}. Sections \ref{sec:design}
present \TABARNAC~ design. Finally we show some example of performance
improvement in section \ref{sec:expe} and we give our conclusions in section
\ref{sec:concl}.
